0012-Pulse-Compiler-and-IR (#45)
Qiskit/RFCs: ####-Pulse-Channels-IR-and-Compiler.md

- Pulse level (`SymbolicPulse`,`WaveForm`)
- Instruction level (`Play`,`Delay`...)
- Program level (`Schedule`,`ScheduleBlock`)
This proposal focuses on the instruction level, and the necessary compilation needs that will arise.
The main goal is to allow for clear and simple backend agnostic (but not architecture agnostic) pulse templates.
To do this, one must move away from the `Channel`s setup, which can't be used without specific backend mapping.

The new Pulse IR and compiler will support the transition, and provide a unified compilation tool for every need and desired output format.

No API breaking changes are needed. New and legacy options can coexist.

## Detailed Design
### Channel rework
To replace the legacy Channels we propose to specify instructions in terms of `LogicalElement`s and `Frame`s:

- `LogicalElement` - every type of element in the HW which the user can control ("play pulses on"). For example, a qubit is a `LogicalElement`, and not the specific port used to drive it. The most notable example of a logical element is of course the `Qubit`, but in the future one can imagine dedicated couplers, flux controls and so on.

> - `Frame` - a combination of frequency and phase. Subclasses used to identify the frame with a backend default. Notable examples are `QubitFrame` and `MeasurementFrame` associated with the default driving and measurement frequencies (respectively) of a qubit.

Author: I was thinking that all indices should be regarded as logical, and the user will then provide the compiler with a mapping from logical to physical qubits. If no mapping is provided, the logical qubits will be trivially mapped to the physical qubits.

> - `Frame` - a combination of frequency and phase. Subclasses used to identify the frame with a backend default. Notable examples are `QubitFrame` and `MeasurementFrame` associated with the default driving and measurement frequencies (respectively) of a qubit.

Reviewer: Fair enough. What about Channel indices? This is assumed to be physical?

> - `Frame` - a combination of frequency and phase. Subclasses used to identify the frame with a backend default. Notable examples are `QubitFrame` and `MeasurementFrame` associated with the default driving and measurement frequencies (respectively) of a qubit.

Author: Yes. Because they are linked to the backend mapping, I think you have to treat them as physical.

> - `Frame` - a combination of frequency and phase. Subclasses used to identify the frame with a backend default. Notable examples are `QubitFrame` and `MeasurementFrame` associated with the default driving and measurement frequencies (respectively) of a qubit.

Reviewer: Since we canonicalize Channels and convert everything into mixed frame representation (you plan to expose `MixedFrame`), we may have the mixture of physical and virtual frames. If we don't have explicit distinction, we should have layout stage before the mixed frame conversion pass to ensure mixed frame are all physical in IR.

> - `Frame` - a combination of frequency and phase. Subclasses used to identify the frame with a backend default. Notable examples are `QubitFrame` and `MeasurementFrame` associated with the default driving and measurement frequencies (respectively) of a qubit.

Author: That's a good point. The ordering should be considered carefully.

Using these objects, the above code takes the form:

```
with builder.build() as ecr_schedule_q3q4:
    with align_sequential():
        with align_left():
            Play(GaussianSquare(...), Qubit(3),QubitFrame(4))
            Play(GaussianSquare(...), Qubit(3),QubitFrame(3))
        Play(Gaussian(...), Qubit(3),QubitFrame(3))
        with align_left():
            Play(GaussianSquare(...), Qubit(3),QubitFrame(4))
            Play(GaussianSquare(...), Qubit(3),QubitFrame(3))
```

The new code not only allows to work with logical backend-agnostic qubits, but is also much clearer in conveying the actual actions in play (acting on qubit 3 with the frame of qubit 4 vs with the frame of qubit 3).

> On top of the `LogicalElement` and the `Frame`, another layer of `MixedFrame` will be introduced.

Author: I was thinking of supporting both `LogicalElement`+`Frame` and `MixedFrame`. This also opens the avenue for something like `CRMixedFrame(int,int)` which indicates exactly what you want to achieve and allows to compiler to validate that the qubits are actually coupled. In principle, the same can not be said for `Qubit(int)`+`QubitFrame(other int)`.

The `MixedFrame` is simply a combination of a LogicalElement and a Frame, and in many ways is similar to the legacy `Channel`.
The difference being that a `MixedFrame` does not depend on the backend mapping and has clear relations with other `MixedFrames` as opposed to a `Channel` which hasn't.

It should be noted that custom `Frame` and `MixedFrame` will make it easier to control qudit experiments.

### Pulse IR
The Pulse IR will provide the framework for the compiler to work on and perform the necessary compilation steps. The main components of the IR will be:

- IR Block - A block of instructions (or nested blocks) with an alignment context. This structure is similar to the structure of ScheduleBlock and needed to support one of the main tasks of the compiler - scheduling.

> - IR Instruction - A pulse program instruction. Typically, it will be initialized without concrete timing, and will be scheduled during the compiler operation.

Author: The instructions will be grouped in the IR objects, so I think that will make a composite pattern a bit redundant here?

> - IR Instruction - A pulse program instruction. Typically, it will be initialized without concrete timing, and will be scheduled during the compiler operation.

Reviewer: Could be. A good point of using composite pattern is that we can remove branching or dispaching which could make code more readable (originally we have implemented `Schedule` and `Instruction` by using this pattern). Maybe this doesn't fit in here because `PulseIR` doesn't need time point.

> - IR Instruction - A pulse program instruction. Typically, it will be initialized without concrete timing, and will be scheduled during the compiler operation.

Author: It seems to me like everything we can do with a composite pattern we can also do by acting on `PulseIR` objects? We can revisit this later to see if we can improve code readability.

- Introduce new pass based Pulse Compiler and the supporting Pulse IR (intermediate representation).
- Introduce new model to supplement the existing `Channel` model, that will allow writing backend-agnostic template pulse programs.

Comments are welcome.

## Motivation
Qiskit Pulse currently has no unified compilation pathway. Different tasks are handled by the different code segments. This not only creates code clutter which is hard to maintain,
but also limits the ability of vendors to adapt Qiskit Pulse, or adjust Qiskit Pulse to new HW developments. The circuit module of Qiskit already uses a pass based compilation process,
which gives the flexibility to add\change\adapt passes according to the changing needs.

A prime example for the need for a better compilation process, is given by the second part of this proposal - rework of the `Channel` model.

The legacy `Channel`s correspond to what the backend calls a mixed frame - a combination of specific HW port, and the frame (frequency and phase) needed to play pulses.
However, to specify a Channel one must be aware of the backend mapping. For example, the following pulse schedule is an ECR pulse for qubits 3 and 4:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
```

Same for other code block. This improves readability.

        self.operands = operands
```

### Compiler
The compiler will be built with a shared design of Qiskit's pass manager (based on PR #10474), and will thus be easily extendable to other tasks. The pass based approach allows for simple modification of the lowering process for vendors or Qiskit team. 
A typical compiler call will look like:
```
payload = compile(my_pulse_prog, backend, target="pulse_qobj")
```
where the backend is provided to accomodate the compiled program to the backend constraints and mappings. An optional argument will be a mapping between logical and physical qubits, as under the new model all indices will be assumed logical. If no mapping is provided, the trivial one will be used.

The first step of every compiler run will be to initialize the IR of the pulse program. The IR will be initialized with no concrete timing, and the scheduling will be carried out next.

Next we highlight some of the tasks handled by the compiler.

#### Scheduling
- Canonicalization (transform pass) - If legacy `Channel`s were used, they will be mapped to `MixedFrame`s using the backend mapping. This is the only scenario where backend mapping will be needed for this stage.

> - Identify frames and mixed frames (characterization pass) - `FrameInstruction`s will need to be broadcasted to every `MixedFrame` associated with that `Frame`. Therefore, we need identify every `MixedFrame`, `Frame` and the relations between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Identify frames and mixed frames (characterization pass) - Instruction without having logical element attached will need to be broadcasted to every `MixedFrame` associated with that `Frame`. Therefore, we need identify every `MixedFrame`, `Frame` and the relations between them.
```

- Schedule each block -
  - Starting from the lowest blocks, each block will be scheduled on its own.

>   - Set\shift frequency\phase instructions will be broadcasted when necessary, and the additional mixed frames will be added to the block.

Reviewer: We can add analysis pass that lists every mixed frame before doing broadcasting the instruction. I think this is more efficient than doing it on the fly.

Author: I agree, and that's why I listed it a few steps earlier :) 
But there were some inaccuracies there which I had to be corrected.
